# RNA-Sequencing-Galaxy-pipeline
Galaxy Training Network logo Galaxy Training!
 Transcriptomics
curriculum Learning Pathways
help Help 
galaxy-gear Settings 
Search Tutorials
Reference-based RNA-Seq data analysis
Author(s)
orcid logoBérénice Batut avatarBérénice Batutorcid logoMallory Freeberg avatarMallory Freebergorcid logoMo Heydarian avatarMo Heydarianorcid logoAnika Erxleben avatarAnika Erxlebenorcid logoPavankumar Videm avatarPavankumar Videmorcid logoClemens Blank avatarClemens Blankorcid logoMaria Doyle avatarMaria Doyleorcid logoNicola Soranzo avatarNicola Soranzoorcid logoPeter van Heusden avatarPeter van Heusdenorcid logoLucille Delisle avatarLucille Delisle
Editor(s)
orcid logoHelena Rasche avatarHelena Rascheorcid logoClea Siguret avatarClea Siguret
Reviewer(s)
Helena Rasche avatarWolfgang Maier avatarPavankumar Videm avatarBérénice Batut avatarLucille Delisle avatarBjörn Grüning avatarNicola Soranzo avatarHans-Rudolf Hotz avatarCristóbal Gallardo avatarSaskia Hiltemann avatarGraeme Tyson avatarMaria Doyle avatarAmirhossein Naghsh Nilchi avatarMehmet Tekman avatarAnika Erxleben avatarSimon Bray avatarClemens Blank avatarEkaterina Polkh avatarWilliam Durand avatarMarius van den Beek avatarNiall Beard avatarMartin Čech avatarArmin Dadras avatarFlorian Heyl avatar
OverviewCreative Commons License: CC-BY Questions:
What are the steps to process RNA-Seq data?

How to identify differentially expressed genes across multiple experimental conditions?

What are the biological functions impacted by the differential expression of genes?

 Objectives:
Check a sequence quality report generated by Falco/MultiQC for RNA-Seq data

Explain the principle and specificity of mapping of RNA-Seq data to an eukaryotic reference genome

Select and run a state of the art mapping tool for RNA-Seq data

Evaluate the quality of mapping results

Describe the process to estimate the library strandness

Estimate the number of reads per genes

Explain the count normalization to perform before sample comparison

Construct and run a differential gene expression analysis

Analyze the DESeq2 output to identify, annotate and visualize differentially expressed genes

Perform a gene ontology enrichment analysis

Perform and visualize an enrichment analysis for KEGG pathways

 Requirements:
Introduction to Galaxy Analyses
slides Slides: Quality Control
tutorial Hands-on: Quality Control
slides Slides: Mapping
tutorial Hands-on: Mapping
 Time estimation: 8 hours
 Level: Introductory Introductory  
 Translations:  Deutsch  Español  Italiano
 Supporting Materials:
      
 
Data upload
Quality control
Mapping
Counting the number of reads per annotated gene
Analysis of the differential gene expression
Functional enrichment analysis of the DE genes
Conclusion
Frequently Asked Questions
References
Feedback
Citing this Tutorial
In recent years, RNA sequencing (in short RNA-Seq) has become a very widely used technology to analyze the continuously changing cellular transcriptome, i.e. the set of all RNA molecules in one cell or a population of cells. One of the most common aims of RNA-Seq is the profiling of gene expression by identifying genes or molecular pathways that are differentially expressed (DE) between two or more biological conditions. This tutorial demonstrates a computational workflow for the detection of DE genes and pathways from RNA-Seq data by providing a complete analysis of an RNA-Seq experiment profiling Drosophila cells after the depletion of a regulatory gene.

In the study of Brooks et al. 2011, the authors identified genes and pathways regulated by the Pasilla gene (the Drosophila homologue of the mammalian splicing regulators Nova-1 and Nova-2 proteins) using RNA-Seq data. They depleted the Pasilla (PS) gene in Drosophila melanogaster by RNA interference (RNAi). Total RNA was then isolated and used to prepare both single-end and paired-end RNA-Seq libraries for treated (PS depleted) and untreated samples. These libraries were sequenced to obtain RNA-Seq reads for each sample. The RNA-Seq data for the treated and the untreated samples can be compared to identify the effects of Pasilla gene depletion on gene expression.

In this tutorial, we illustrate the analysis of the gene expression data step by step using 7 of the original datasets:

4 untreated samples: GSM461176, GSM461177, GSM461178, GSM461182
3 treated samples (Pasilla gene depleted by RNAi): GSM461179, GSM461180, GSM461181
Each sample constitutes a separate biological replicate of the corresponding condition (treated or untreated). Moreover, two of the treated and two of the untreated samples are from a paired-end sequencing assay, while the remaining samples are from a single-end sequencing experiment.

 Comment: Full data
The original data are available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE18508. The raw RNA-Seq reads have been extracted from the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) files and converted into FASTQ files.

Agenda
In this tutorial, we will deal with:

Data upload
Quality control
Mapping
Mapping
Inspection of the mapping results
Counting the number of reads per annotated gene
Estimation of the strandness
Counting reads per genes
Analysis of the differential gene expression
Identification of the differentially expressed features
Annotation of the DESeq2 results
Extraction and annotation of differentially expressed genes
Visualization of the expression of the differentially expressed genes
Functional enrichment analysis of the DE genes
Gene Ontology analysis
KEGG pathways analysis
Conclusion
Data upload
In the first part of this tutorial we will use the files for 2 out of the 7 samples to demonstrate how to calculate read counts (a measure of the gene expression) from FASTQ files (quality control, mapping, read counting). We provide the FASTQ files for the other 5 samples if you want to reproduce the whole analysis later.

In the second part of the tutorial, read counts of all 7 samples are used to identify and visualize the DE genes, gene families and molecular pathways due to the depletion of the PS gene.

 Hands On: Data upload
Create a new history for this RNA-Seq exercise

 Tip: Creating a new history

Import the FASTQ file pairs from Zenodo or a data library:
GSM461177 (untreated): GSM461177_1 and GSM461177_2
GSM461180 (treated): GSM461180_1 and GSM461180_2
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461177_1.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461177_2.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461180_1.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461180_2.fastqsanger
 Tip: Importing via links

 Tip: Importing data from a data library

 Comment
Note that these are the full files for the samples and ~1.5Gb each so it may take some minutes to import.

For a quicker run-through of the FASTQ steps a small subset of each FASTQ file (~5Mb) can be found here on Zenodo:

https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461177_1_subsampled.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461177_2_subsampled.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461180_1_subsampled.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461180_2_subsampled.fastqsanger
Check that the datatype is fastqsanger (e.g. not fastq). If it is not, please change the datatype to fastqsanger.

 Tip: Changing the datatype

Create a paired collection named 2 PE fastqs, name your pairs with the sample name followed by the attributes: GSM461177_untreat_paired and GSM461180_treat_paired.

 Tip: Creating a paired collection

Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Question
How are the DNA sequences stored?
What are the other entries of the file?
 Solution
The reads are raw data from the sequencing machine without any pretreatments. They need to be assessed for their quality.

Quality control
During sequencing, errors are introduced, such as incorrect nucleotides being called. These are due to the technical limitations of each sequencing platform. Sequencing errors might bias the analysis and can lead to a misinterpretation of the data. Adapters may also be present if the reads are longer than the fragments sequenced and trimming these may improve the number of reads mapped.

Sequence quality control is therefore an essential first step in your analysis. We will use similar tools as described in the “Quality control” tutorial:

Falco, which is an efficiency-optimized rewrite of FastQC, to create a report of sequence quality
MultiQC (Ewels et al. 2016) to aggregate generated reports
Cutadapt (Marcel 2011) to improve the quality of sequences via trimming and filtering.
Unfortunately the current version of MultiQC (the tool we use to combine reports) does not support list of pairs collections. We will first need to transform our list of pairs to a simple list.

 Details: What does this mean exactly?
 Hands On: Quality control
 Flatten collection with the following parameters convert the list of pairs into a simple list:
“Input Collection”: 2 PE fastqs
 Falco ( Galaxy version 1.2.4+galaxy0) with the following parameters:
param-collection “Raw read data from your current history”: Output of Flatten collection tool selected as Dataset collection
 Tip: Selecting a dataset collection as input

Inspect the webpage output of Falco tool for the GSM461177_untreat_paired sample (forward and reverse)

 Question
What is the read length?

 Solution
As it is tedious to inspect all these reports individually we will combine them with  MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4).

 MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4) to aggregate the Falco reports with the following parameters:
In “Results”:
“Results”
“Which tool was used generate logs?”: FastQC (Falco is a drop-in replacement for FastQC and we can pass its output to MultiQC as if it had been generated by the original tool.)
In “FastQC output”:
param-repeat “Insert FastQC output”
param-collection “FastQC output”: Falco on collection N: RawData (output of Falco tool)
Inspect the webpage output from MultiQC for each FASTQ

 Question
What do you think of the quality of the sequences?
What should we do?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We should trim the reads to get rid of bases that were sequenced with high uncertainty (i.e. low quality bases) at the read ends, and also remove the reads of overall bad quality.

 Question
What is the relation between GSM461177_untreat_paired_forward and GSM461177_untreat_paired_reverse ?

 Solution
 Hands On: Trimming FASTQs
 Cutadapt ( Galaxy version 5.2+galaxy0) with the following parameters to trim low quality sequences:
“Single-end or Paired-end reads?”: Paired-end Collection
param-collection “Paired Collection”: 2 PE fastqs
In “Other Read Trimming Options”
“Quality cutoff(s) (R1)”: 20
In “Read Filtering Options”
“Minimum length (R1)”: 20
In “Additional outputs to generate”
Select: Report: Cutadapt's per-adapter statistics. You can use this file with MultiQC.
 Question
Why do we run the trimming tool only once on a paired-end dataset and not twice, once for each dataset?

 Solution
 MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4) to aggregate the Cutadapt reports with the following parameters:
In “Results”:
param-repeat “Results”
“Which tool was used generate logs?”: Cutadapt/Trim Galore!
param-collection “Output of Cutadapt”: Cutadapt on collection N: Report (output of Cutadapt tool) selected as Dataset collection
 Question
How many sequence pairs have been removed because at least one read was shorter than the length cutoff?
How many basepairs have been removed from the forward reads because of bad quality? And from the reverse reads?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Mapping
To make sense of the reads, we need to first figure out where the sequences originated from in the genome, so we can then determine to which genes they belong. When a reference genome for the organism is available, this process is known as aligning or “mapping” the reads to the reference. This is equivalent to solving a jigsaw puzzle, but unfortunately, not all pieces are unique.

 Comment
Do you want to learn more about the principles behind mapping? Follow our training.

In this study, the authors used Drosophila melanogaster cells. We should therefore map the quality-controlled sequences to the reference genome of Drosophila melanogaster.

 Question
What is a reference genome?
For each model organism, several possible reference genomes may be available (e.g. hg19 and hg38 for human). What do they correspond to?
Which reference genome should we use?
 Solution
With eukaryotic transcriptomes most reads originate from processed mRNAs lacking introns:

Types of RNA-Seq reads. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 9: The types of RNA-seq reads (adaption of the Figure 1a from Kim et al. 2015): reads that mapped entirely within an exon (in red), reads spanning over 2 exons (in blue), read spanning over more than 2 exons (in purple)
Therefore they cannot be simply mapped back to the genome as we normally do for DNA data. Spliced-awared mappers have been developed to efficiently map transcript-derived reads against a reference genome:

Splice-aware alignment. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 10: Principle of spliced mappers: (1) identification of the reads spanning a single exon, (2) identification of the splicing junctions on the unmapped reads
 Details: More details on the different spliced mappers
Mapping
We will map our reads to the Drosophila melanogaster genome using STAR (Dobin et al. 2013).

 Hands On: Spliced mapping
Import the Ensembl gene annotation for Drosophila melanogaster (Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz) from the Shared Data library if available or from Zenodo into your current Galaxy history

https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
Rename the dataset if necessary
Verify that the datatype is gtf (or gtf.gz) and not gff.
 Comment: How to get annotation file?
Annotation files from model organisms may be available on the Shared Data library (the path to them will change from one Galaxy server to the other). You could also retrieve the annotation file from UCSC (using UCSC Main tool).

To generate this specific file, the annotation file was downloaded from Ensembl which provides a more comprehensive database of transcripts and was further adapted to make it work with the dm6 genome which is installed on compatible Galaxy servers.

 RNA STAR ( Galaxy version 2.7.11b+galaxy0) with the following parameters to map your reads on the reference genome:
“Single-end or paired-end reads”: Paired-end (as collection)
param-collection “RNA-Seq FASTQ/FASTA paired reads”: the Cutadapt on collection N: Reads (output of Cutadapt tool)
“Custom or built-in reference genome”: Use a built-in index
“Reference genome with or without an annotation”: use genome reference without builtin gene-model but provide a gtf
“Select reference genome”: Fly (Drosophila melanogaster): dm6 Full
param-file “Gene model (gff3,gtf) file for splice junctions”: the imported Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
“Length of the genomic sequence around annotated junctions”: 36 (This parameter should be length of reads - 1)
“Per gene/transcript output”: Per gene read counts (GeneCounts)
“Compute coverage”:
Yes in bedgraph format
 MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4) to aggregate the STAR logs with the following parameters:
In “Results”:
“Results”
“Which tool was used generate logs?”: STAR
In “STAR output”:
param-repeat “Insert STAR output”
“Type of STAR output?”: Log
param-collection “STAR log output”: RNA STAR on collection N: log (output of RNA STAR tool)
 Question
What percentage of reads are mapped exactly once for both samples?
What are the other available statistics?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

According to the MultiQC report, about 80% of reads for both samples are mapped exactly once to the reference genome. We can proceed with the analysis since only percentages below 70% should be investigated for potential contamination. Both samples have a low (less than 10%) percentage of reads that mapped to multiple locations on the reference genome. This is in the normal range for Illumina short-read sequencing, but may be lower for newer long-read sequencing datasets that can span larger repeated regions in the reference genome and will be higher for 3’ end libraries.

The main output of STAR is a BAM file.

A BAM (Binary Alignment Map) file is a compressed binary file storing the read sequences, whether they have been aligned to a reference sequence (e.g. a chromosome), and if so, the position on the reference sequence at which they have been aligned.

 Hands On: Inspect a BAM/SAM file
Inspect the param-file output of RNA STAR tool
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

A BAM file (or a SAM file, the non-compressed version) consists of:

A header section (the lines starting with @) containing metadata particularly the chromosome names and lengths (lines starting with the @SQ symbol)
An alignment section consisting of a table with 11 mandatory fields, as well as a variable number of optional fields:

Col	Field	Type	Brief Description
1	QNAME	String	Query template NAME
2	FLAG	Integer	Bitwise FLAG
3	RNAME	String	References sequence NAME
4	POS	Integer	1- based leftmost mapping POSition
5	MAPQ	Integer	MAPping Quality
6	CIGAR	String	CIGAR String
7	RNEXT	String	Ref. name of the mate/next read
8	PNEXT	Integer	Position of the mate/next read
9	TLEN	Integer	Observed Template LENgth
10	SEQ	String	Segment SEQuence
11	QUAL	String	ASCII of Phred-scaled base QUALity+33
 Question
Which information do you find in a SAM/BAM file?
What is the additional information compared to a FASTQ file?
 Solution
Inspection of the mapping results
The BAM file contains information for all our reads, making it difficult to inspect and explore in text format. A powerful tool to visualize the content of BAM files is the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, Robinson et al. 2011). Alternatively or complementarily, you can use JBrowse2, a genome browser which is directly integrated into Galaxy.

 Hands On: Inspection of mapping results with IGV
Install IGV (if not already installed)
Start IGV locally
Click on the collection RNA STAR on collection N: mapped.bam (output of RNA STAR tool)
Expand the param-file GSM461177_untreat_paired file.
Click on the galaxy-barchart visualize icon in the GSM461177 file block.
In the center panel click on the local in display with IGV (local, D. melanogaster (dm6))to load the reads into the IGV browser
 Comment
In order for this step to work, you will need to have either IGV or Java Web Start installed on your machine. However, the questions in this section can also be answered by inspecting the IGV screenshots below.

Check the IGV documentation for more information.

IGV tool: Zoom to chr4:540,000-560,000 (Chromosome 4 between 540 kb to 560 kb)

 Question
Screenshot of the IGV view on Chromosome 4. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 16: Screenshot of IGV on Chromosome 4
What information appears at the top as grey peaks?
What do the connecting lines between some of the aligned reads indicate?
 Solution
IGV tool: Inspect the splice junctions using a Sashimi plot

 Comment: Creation of a Sashimi plot
Right click on the BAM file (in IGV)
Select Sashimi Plot from the menu
 Question
Screenshot of a Sashimi plot of Chromosome 4. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 17: Screenshot of a Sashimi plot of Chromosome 4
What does the vertical red bar graph represent? What about the arcs with numbers?
What do the numbers on the arcs mean?
Why do we observe different stacked groups of blue linked boxes at the bottom?
 Solution
 Comment
Check the IGV documentation on Sashimi plots to find some clues

Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Hands On: Inspection of mapping results with JBrowse2
 JBrowse2 ( Galaxy version 3.6.5+galaxy1) with the following parameters:
“Action”: New JBrowse Instance
In “Genome Assembly”:
param-repeat “Insert Genome Assembly”
“Reference genome to display”: Use a built-in genome
“Select a reference genome”: Fly (Drosophila melanogaster): dm6 Full
“Default region to display”: chr4:540000..560000
In “Track Category”:
param-repeat “Insert Track Category”
“Track Category Label”: BAM
In “Track”:
param-repeat “Insert Track”
“Track Type”: BAM Pileups
“BAM Track Data”: Use data from history
param-collection “BAM Track Data”: RNA STAR on collection N: mapped.bam (output of RNA STAR tool)
param-repeat “Insert Track Category”
“Track Category Label”: Genes
In “Track”:
param-repeat “Insert Track”
“Track Type”: GFF/GFF3/BED Features
“GFF/GFF3/BED Track Data”: Use data from history
param-file “GFF/GFF3/BED Track Data”: Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109.gtf.gz
Inspect the result by clicking the eye-icon.

 Question
Screenshot of the JBrowse2 view on Chromosome 4. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 18: Screenshot of JBrowse2 on Chromosome 4
What information appears at the top as grey peaks?
What do the connecting lines between some of the aligned reads indicate?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Details: Further check for the quality of the data
After the mapping, we now have the information on where the reads are located on the reference genome and how well they were mapped. The next step in RNA-Seq data analysis is quantification of the number of reads mapped to genomic features (genes, transcripts, exons, …).

 Comment
The quantification depends on both the reference genome (the FASTA file) and its associated annotations (the GTF file). It is extremely important to use an annotation file that corresponds to the same version of the reference genome you used for the mapping (e.g. dm6 here), as the chromosomal coordinates of genes are usually different amongst different reference genome versions.

Here we will focus on the genes, as we would like to identify the ones that are differentially expressed because of the Pasilla gene knockdown.

Counting the number of reads per annotated gene
To compare the expression of single genes between different conditions (e.g. with or without PS depletion), an essential first step is to quantify the number of reads per gene, or more specifically the number of reads mapping to the exons of each gene.

Counting the number of reads per annotated gene. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 20: Counting the number of reads per annotated gene
 Question
In the previous image,

How many reads are found for the different exons?
How many reads are found for the different genes?
 Solution
Two main tools are available for read counting: HTSeq-count (Anders et al. 2015) or featureCounts (Liao et al. 2013). Additionally, STAR allows to count reads while mapping: its results are identical to those from HTSeq-count. While this output is sufficient for most analyses, featureCounts offers more customization on how to count reads (minimum mapping quality, counting reads instead of fragments, count transcripts instead of genes etc.).

In principle, the counting of reads overlapping with genomic features is a fairly simple task. But the strandness of the library needs to be determined. Indeed this is a parameter of featureCounts. On the contrary, STAR evaluates the counts into the three possible strandnesses but you still need this information to extract the counts which corresponds to your library.

Estimation of the strandness
RNAs that are typically targeted in RNA-Seq experiments are single stranded (e.g., mRNAs) and thus have polarity (5’ and 3’ ends that are functionally distinct). During a typical RNA-Seq experiment the information about strandness is lost after both strands of cDNA are synthesized, size selected, and converted into a sequencing library. However, this information can be quite useful for the read counting step, especially for reads located on the overlap of 2 genes that are on different strands.

Why strandness?
Open image in new tab


Figure 21: If strandness information was lost during library preparation, Read1 will be assigned to gene1 located on the forward strand but Read2 will be 'ambiguous' as it can be assigned to gene1 (forward strand) or gene2 (reverse strand).
Some library preparation protocols create so-called stranded RNA-Seq libraries that preserve the strand information (Levin et al. 2010 provides an excellent overview). In practice, with Illumina RNA-Seq protocols you are unlikely to encounter all of the possibilities described in this article. You will most likely deal with either:

Unstranded RNA-Seq data
Stranded RNA-Seq data generated by the use of specialized RNA isolation kits during sample preparation
 Details: More details about strandness
This information should be provided with your FASTQ files, ask your sequencing facility! If not, try to find it on the site where you downloaded the data or in the corresponding publication.

How to estimate the strandness?
Open image in new tab


Figure 25: In a stranded forward library, reads map mostly on the same strand as the genes. With stranded reverse library, reads map mostly on the opposite strand. With unstranded library, reads map on genes on both strands independently of the orientation of the gene (Example for single-end read library).
There are 5 ways to estimate strandness from STAR results (choose the one you prefer)

We can do a visual inspection of read strands on IGV (for Paired-end dataset it is less easy than with single read and when you have a lot of samples, this can be painful).

 Hands On: Estimate strandness with IGV for a paired-end library
Go back to your IGV session with the GSM461177_untreat_paired BAM opened.

 Tip: If you don't have it
IGV tool

Zoom to chr3R:9,445,000-9,448,000 (Chromosome 3 between 9,445 kb to 9,448 kb), on the mapped.bam track
Right click and then select Color Aligments by -> first-of-pair strand
Right click and select Squished
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Question
Screenshot of the IGV view on ps. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 26: Screenshot of IGV on ps
Are the reads evenly distributed between the 2 colors (red - forward and blue - reverse)?
What is the type of library strandness?
 Solution
We can do a the same visual inspection of read strands on JBrowse2.

 Hands On: Estimate strandness with JBrowse2 for a paired-end library
Go back to your JBrowse2 result (click on the eye icon).

Zoom to chr3R:9445000..9448000 (Chromosome 3 between 9,445 kb to 9,448 kb)
Click on the 3 dots close to the name of the bam file (for example GSM461177_untreat_paired) then select Pileup settings -> Color by... -> First-of-pair strand
Click on the same 3 dots then select Pileup settings -> Set feature height... -> Compact
Repeat with the second bam file.
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Question
Screenshot of the JBrowse2 view on ps. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 28: Screenshot of JBrowse2 on ps
Are the reads evenly distributed between the 2 colors (red - forward and blue - reverse)?
What is the type of library strandness?
 Solution
Alternatively, instead of using the BAM you can use the stranded coverage generated by STAR. Using pyGenomeTracks we will be able to visualize the coverage on each strand for each sample. This tool has a lot of parameters to customize your plots.

 Hands On: Estimate strandness with pyGenometracks from STAR coverage
 pyGenomeTracks ( Galaxy version 3.9+galaxy0):
“Region of the genome to plot”: chr4:540,000-560,000
In “Include tracks in your plot”:
param-repeat “Insert Include tracks in your plot”
“Choose style of the track”: Bedgraph track
“Plot title”: You need to leave this field empty so the title on the plot will be the sample name.
param-collection “Track file(s) bedgraph format”: Select RNA STAR on collection N: Coverage Uniquely mapped strand 1.
“Color of track”: Select a color of your choice for example blue
“Minimum value”: 0
“height”: 3
“Show visualization of data range”: Yes
param-repeat “Insert Include tracks in your plot”
“Choose style of the track”: Bedgraph track
“Plot title”: You need to leave this field empty so the title on the plot will be the sample name.
param-collection “Track file(s) bedgraph format”: Select RNA STAR on collection N: Coverage Uniquely mapped strand 2.
“Color of track”: Select a color of your choice different from the first one for example red
“Minimum value”: 0
“height”: 3
“Show visualization of data range”: Yes
param-repeat “Insert Include tracks in your plot”
“Choose style of the track”: Gene track / Bed track
“Plot title”: Genes
“Use bed or gtf input:”: gtf
param-file “Track file(s) gtf format”: Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
“height”: 5
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Question
pyGenomeTracks. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 30: STAR coverage for strand 1 in blue and strand 2 in red
Which gene are we looking at? Which strand it is?
What is the average coverage for each strand?
What is the strandness of the library?
 Solution
You can use the output of STAR with the counts. Indeed as explained before, STAR evaluates the number of reads on genes for the three possible scenarios: unstranded library, stranded forward or stranded reverse. The condition which attributes more reads to gene must be the condition which matches your library.

 Hands On: Estimate strandness with STAR counts
 MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4) to aggregate the STAR counts with the following parameters:
In “Results”:
“Results”
“Which tool was used generate logs?”: STAR
In “STAR output”:
param-repeat “Insert STAR output”
“Type of STAR output?”: Gene counts
param-collection “STAR gene count output”: RNA STAR on collection N: reads per gene (output of RNA STAR tool)
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Question
What percentage of reads are asigned to genes if the library is unstranded/same stranded/reverse stranded?
What is the strandness of the library?
 Solution
Another option is to estimate these parameters with a tool called Infer Experiment from the RSeQC (Wang et al. 2012) tool suite.

This tool takes the BAM files from the mapping, selects a subsample of the reads and compares their genome coordinates and strands with those of the reference gene model (from an annotation file). Based on the strand of the genes, it can gauge whether sequencing is strand-specific, and if so, how reads are stranded (forward or reverse).

 Hands On: Determining the library strandness using Infer Experiment
 Convert GTF to BED12 ( Galaxy version 357) to convert the GTF file to BED:
param-file “GTF File to convert”: Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
You may already have converted this BED12 file from the Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz dataset earlier if you did the detailed part on quality checks. In this case, no need to redo it a second time

 Infer Experiment ( Galaxy version 5.0.3+galaxy0) to determine the library strandness with the following parameters:
param-collection “Input .bam file”: RNA STAR on collection N: mapped.bam (output of RNA STAR tool)
param-file “Reference gene model”: BED12 file (output of Convert GTF to BED12 tool)
“Number of reads sampled”: 200000
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

 Infer Experiment ( Galaxy version 5.0.3+galaxy0) tool generates one file with information on:

Paired-end or single-end library
Fraction of reads failed to determine
2 lines
For single-end
Fraction of reads explained by "++,--": the fraction of reads that assigned to forward strand
Fraction of reads explained by "+-,-+": the fraction of reads that assigned to reverse strand
For paired-end
Fraction of reads explained by "1++,1--,2+-,2-+": the fraction of reads that assigned to forward strand
Fraction of reads explained by "1+-,1-+,2++,2--": the fraction of reads that assigned to reverse strand
If the two “Fraction of reads explained by” numbers are close to each other, we conclude that the library is not a strand-specific dataset (or unstranded).

 Question
What are the “Fraction of the reads explained by” results for GSM461177_untreat_paired?
Do you think the library type of the 2 samples is stranded or unstranded?
 Solution
 Details: Strandness and software settings
Counting reads per genes
 Hands-on: Choose Your Own Tutorial
This is a 'Choose Your Own Tutorial' (CYOT) section (also known as 'Choose Your Own Analysis' (CYOA)), where you can select between multiple paths. Click one of the buttons below to select how you want to follow the tutorial


In order to count the number of reads per gene, we offer a parallel tutorial for the 2 methods (STAR and featureCounts) which give very similar results. Which methods would you prefer to use?

 
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

As you chose to use the featureCounts flavor of the tutorial, we now run featureCounts to count the number of reads per annotated gene.

 Hands On: Counting the number of reads per annotated gene
 featureCounts ( Galaxy version 2.1.1+galaxy0) with the following parameters to count the number of reads per gene:
param-collection “Alignment file”: RNA STAR on collection N: mapped.bam (output of RNA STAR tool)
“Specify strand information”: Unstranded
“Gene annotation file”: A GFF/GTF file in your history
param-file “Gene annotation file”: Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
“GFF feature type filter”: exon
“GFF gene identifier”: gene_id
“Output format”: Gene-ID "\t" read-count (MultiQC/DESeq2/edgeR/limma-voom compatible)
“Create gene-length file”: Yes
“Does the input have read pairs”: Yes, paired-end and count them as 1 single fragment
In “Read filtering options”:
“Minimum mapping quality per read”: 10
 MultiQC ( Galaxy version 1.27+galaxy4) to aggregate the reports with the following parameters:
In “Results”:
“Results”
“Which tool was used generate logs?”: featureCounts
param-collection “Output of FeatureCounts”: featureCounts on collection N: Summary (output of featureCounts tool)
 Question
How many reads have been assigned to a gene?
When should we be worried about the assignment rate? What should we do?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

The main output of featureCounts is a table with the counts, i.e. the number of reads (or fragments in the case of paired-end reads) mapped to each gene (in rows, with their ID in the first column) in the provided annotation. FeatureCount generates also the feature length output datasets. We will need this file later on when we will run the goseq tool.

 Question
Which feature has the most counts for both samples? (Hint: Use the Sort tool)

 Solution
Here we counted reads mapped to genes for two samples. It is really interesting to redo the same procedure on the other datasets, especially to check how parameters differ given the different type of data (single-end versus paired-end).

 Hands On: (Optional) Re-run on the other datasets
You can do the same process on the other sequence files available on Zenodo and on the data library.

Paired-end data
GSM461178_1 and GSM461178_2 that you can label GSM461178_untreat_paired
GSM461181_1 and GSM461181_2 that you can label GSM461181_treat_paired
Single-end data
GSM461176 that you can label GSM461176_untreat_single
GSM461179 that you can label GSM461179_treat_single
GSM461182 that you can label GSM461182_untreat_single
The links to these files are below:

https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461178_1.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461178_2.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461181_1.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461181_2.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461176.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461179.fastqsanger
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461182.fastqsanger
For the single-end data, there is no need to flatten the collection before the Falco step. The parameters of all tools are the same except STAR for which you can set Length of the genomic sequence around annotated junctions to 74 as one dataset has reads of 75bp (others are 44bp and 45bp) and FeatureCount were your data are not paired any more.

Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Analysis of the differential gene expression
Identification of the differentially expressed features
To be able to identify differential gene expression induced by PS depletion, all datasets (3 treated and 4 untreated) must be analyzed following the same procedure. To save time, we have run the previous steps for you. We then obtain 7 files with the counts for each gene of Drosophila for each sample.

 Hands On: Import all count files
Create a new empty history

 Tip: Creating a new history

Import the seven count files from Zenodo or the Shared Data library (as Datasets):

GSM461176_untreat_single_featureCounts.counts
GSM461177_untreat_paired_featureCounts.counts
GSM461178_untreat_paired_featureCounts.counts
GSM461179_treat_single_featureCounts.counts
GSM461180_treat_paired_featureCounts.counts
GSM461181_treat_paired_featureCounts.counts
GSM461182_untreat_single_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461176_untreat_single_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461177_untreat_paired_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461178_untreat_paired_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461179_treat_single_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461180_treat_paired_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461181_treat_paired_featureCounts.counts
https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/GSM461182_untreat_single_featureCounts.counts
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

You might think we can just compare the count values in the files directly and calculate the extent of differential gene expression. However, it is not that simple.

Let’s imagine we have RNA-Seq counts from 3 samples for a genome with 4 genes:

Gene	 Sample 1 Counts	Sample 2 Counts	Sample 3 Counts
A (2kb)	10	12	30
B (4kb)	20	25	60
C (1kb)	5	8	15
D (10kb)	0	0	1
Sample 3 has more reads than the other replicates, regardless of the gene. It has a higher sequencing depth than the other replicates. Gene B is twice as long as gene A: it might explain why it has twice as many reads, regardless of replicates.

The number of sequenced reads mapped to a gene therefore depends on:

The sequencing depth of the samples

Samples sequenced with more depth will have more reads mapping to each genes

The length of the gene

Longer genes will have more reads mapping to them

To compare samples or gene expressions, the gene counts need to be normalized. We could use TPM (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million).

 Details: RPKM, FPKM and TPM?
RNA-Seq is often used to compare one tissue type to another, for example, muscle vs. epithelial tissue. And it could be that there are a lot of muscle specific genes transcribed in muscle but not in the epithelial tissue. We call this a difference in library composition.

It is also possible to see a difference in library composition in the same tissue type after the knock out of a transcription factor.

Let’s imagine we have RNA-Seq counts from 2 samples (same library size: 635 reads), for a genome with 6 genes. The genes have the same expression in both samples, except one: only Sample 1 transcribes gene D, at a high level (563 reads). As the library size is the same for both samples, sample 2 has 563 extra reads to be distributed over genes A, B, C, E and F.

Gene	 Sample 1	Sample 2
A	30	235
B	24	188
C	0	0
D	563	0
E	5	39
F	13	102
Total	635	635
As a result, the read count for all genes except for genes C and D is really high in Sample 2. Nonetheless, the only differentially expressed gene is gene D.

TPM, RPKM or FPKM do not deal with these differences in library composition during normalization, but more complex tools, like DESeq2, do.

DESeq2 (Love et al. 2014) is a great tool for dealing with RNA-seq data and running Differential Gene Expression (DGE) analysis. It takes read count files from different samples, combines them into a big table (with genes in the rows and samples in the columns) and applies normalization for sequencing depth and library composition. We do not need to account for gene length normalization does because we are comparing the counts between sample groups for the same gene.

 Details: Normalization in DESeq2
DESeq2 also runs the Differential Gene Expression (DGE) analysis, which has two basic tasks:

Estimate the biological variance using the replicates for each condition
Estimate the significance of expression differences between any two conditions
This expression analysis is estimated from read counts and attempts are made to correct for variability in measurements using replicates, that are absolutely essential for accurate results. For your own analysis, we advise you to use at least 3, but preferably 5 biological replicates per condition. It is possible to have different numbers of replicates per condition.

 Details: Technical vs biological replicates
Multiple factors with several levels can then be incorporated in the analysis describing known sources of variation (e.g. treatment, tissue type, gender, batches), with two or more levels representing the conditions for each factor. After normalization we can compare the response of the expression of any gene to the presence of different levels of a factor in a statistically reliable way.

In our example, we have samples with two varying factors that can contribute to differences in gene expression:

Treatment (either treated or untreated)
Sequencing type (paired-end or single-end)
Here, treatment is the primary factor that we are interested in. The sequencing type is further information we know about the data that might affect the analysis. Multi-factor analysis allows us to assess the effect of the treatment, while taking the sequencing type into account too.

 Comment
We recommend that you add all factors you think may affect gene expression in your experiment. It can be the sequencing type like here, but it can also be the manipulation (if different persons are involved in the library preparation), other batch effects, etc…

If you have only one or two factors with few number of biological replicates, the basic setup of DESeq2 is enough. In the case of a complex experimental setup with a large number of biological replicates, tag-based collections are appropriate. Both approaches give the same results. The Tag-based approach requires a few additional steps before running the DESeq2 tool but it will payoff when working with a complex experimental setup.

 Hands-on: Choose Your Own Tutorial
This is a 'Choose Your Own Tutorial' (CYOT) section (also known as 'Choose Your Own Analysis' (CYOA)), where you can select between multiple paths. Click one of the buttons below to select how you want to follow the tutorial


Which approach would you prefer to use?

  
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We can now run DESeq2:

 Hands On: Determine differentially expressed features
 DESeq2 ( Galaxy version 2.11.40.8+galaxy0) with the following parameters:
“how”: Select datasets per level
In “Factor”:
“Specify a factor name, e.g. effects_drug_x or cancer_markers”: Treatment
In “1: Factor level”:
“Specify a factor level, typical values could be ‘tumor’, ‘normal’, ‘treated’ or ‘control’“: treated
In “Count file(s)”: Select all the treated count files (GSM461179, GSM461180, GSM461181)
In “2: Factor level”:
“Specify a factor level, typical values could be ‘tumor’, ‘normal’, ‘treated’ or ‘control’“: untreated
In “Count file(s)”: Select all the untreated count files (GSM461176, GSM461177, GSM461178, GSM461182)
param-repeat “Insert Factor”
“Specify a factor name, e.g. effects_drug_x or cancer_markers”: Sequencing
In “Factor level”:
param-repeat “Insert Factor level”
“Specify a factor level, typical values could be ‘tumor’, ‘normal’, ‘treated’ or ‘control’“: PE
In “Count file(s)”: Select all the paired-end count files (GSM461177, GSM461178, GSM461180, GSM461181)
param-repeat “Insert Factor level”
“Specify a factor level, typical values could be ‘tumor’, ‘normal’, ‘treated’ or ‘control’“: SE
In “Count file(s)”: Select all the single-end count files (GSM461176, GSM461179, GSM461182)
“Files have header?”: Yes
“Choice of Input data”: Count data (e.g. from HTSeq-count, featureCounts or StringTie)
In “Advanced options”:
“Use beta priors”: Yes
In “Output options”:
“Output selector”: Generate plots for visualizing the analysis results, Output normalised counts
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Comment wrt beta prior option: the default setting for DESeq2 changed from betaPrior=TRUE to FALSE in version 1.16 (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/news/DESeq2/NEWS). In order to get the same result as before, we use betaPrior=TRUE (aka: “Yes”) in this tutorial.

DESeq2 generated 3 outputs:

A table with the normalized counts for each gene (rows) in the samples (columns)
A graphical summary of the results, useful to evaluate the quality of the experiment:

A plot of the first 2 dimensions from a principal component analysis (PCA), run on the normalized counts of the samples

 Details: What is a PCA?
It shows the samples in the 2D plane spanned by their first two principal components. Each replicate is plotted as an individual data point. This type of plot is useful for visualizing the overall effect of experimental covariates and batch effects.

 Question
DESeq PCA. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 43: Principal component plot of the samples
What is the first dimension (PC1) separating?
And the second dimension (PC2)?
What can we conclude about the DESeq design (factors, levels) we choose?
 Solution
Heatmap of the sample-to-sample distance matrix (with clustering) based on the normalized counts.

The heatmap gives an overview of similarities and dissimilarities between samples: the color represents the distance between the samples. Dark blue means shorter distance, i.e. closer samples given the normalized counts.

 Question
Heatmap of the sample-to-sample distances. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 44: Heatmap of the sample-to-sample distances
How are the samples grouped?

 Solution
Dispersion estimates: gene-wise estimates (black), the fitted values (red), and the final maximum a posteriori estimates used in testing (blue)

This dispersion plot is typical, with the final estimates shrunk from the gene-wise estimates towards the fitted estimates. Some gene-wise estimates are flagged as outliers and not shrunk towards the fitted value. The amount of shrinkage can be more or less than seen here, depending on the sample size, the number of coefficients, the row mean and the variability of the gene-wise estimates.

Histogram of p-values for the genes in the comparison between the 2 levels of the 1st factor

An MA plot:

This displays the global view of the relationship between the expression change of conditions (log ratios, M), the average expression strength of the genes (average mean, A), and the ability of the algorithm to detect differential gene expression. The genes that passed the significance threshold (adjusted p-value < 0.1) are colored in blue.

A summary file with the following values for each gene:

Gene identifiers
Mean normalized counts, averaged over all samples from both conditions
Fold change in log2 (logarithm base 2)

The log2 fold changes are based on the primary factor level 1 vs factor level 2, hence the input order of factor levels is important. Here, DESeq2 computes fold changes of ‘treated’ samples against ‘untreated’ from the first factor ‘Treatment’, i.e. the values correspond to up- or downregulation of genes in treated samples.

Standard error estimate for the log2 fold change estimate
Wald statistic
p-value for the statistical significance of this change
p-value adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, which controls false discovery rate (FDR)
 Tip: What are p-values and what are they used for?
For more information about DESeq2 and its outputs, you can have a look at the DESeq2 documentation.

 Question
Is the FBgn0003360 gene differentially expressed because of the treatment? If yes, how much?
Is the Pasilla gene (ps, FBgn0261552) downregulated by the RNAi treatment?
We could also hypothetically be interested in the effect of the sequencing (or other secondary factors in other cases). How would we know the differentially expressed genes because of sequencing type?
We would like to analyze the interaction between the treatment and the sequencing. How could we do that?
 Solution
Annotation of the DESeq2 results
The ID for each gene is something like FBgn0003360, which is an ID from the corresponding database, here Flybase (Thurmond et al. 2018). These IDs are unique but sometimes we prefer to have the gene symbols, even if they may not reference an unique gene (e.g. duplicated after re-annotation). But gene symbols may hint already to a function or they help you to search for desired candidates. We would also like to display the location of these genes within the genome. We can extract such information from the annotation file which we used for mapping and counting.

 Hands On: Annotation of the DESeq2 results
Import the Ensembl gene annotation for Drosophila melanogaster (Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz) from the previous history, or from the Shared Data library or from Zenodo:

https://zenodo.org/record/6457007/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
 Annotate DESeq2/DEXSeq output tables ( Galaxy version 1.1.0+galaxy1) with:

param-file “Tabular output of DESeq2/edgeR/limma/DEXSeq”: the DESeq2 result file (output of DESeq2 tool)
“Input file type”: DESeq2/edgeR/limma
param-file “Reference annotation in GFF/GTF format”: imported gtf Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.32.109_UCSC.gtf.gz
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

The generated output is an extension of the previous file:

Gene identifiers
Mean normalized counts over all samples
Log2 fold change
Standard error estimate for the log2 fold change estimate
Wald statistic
p-value for the Wald statistic
p-value adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for the Wald statistic
Chromosome
Start
End
Strand
Feature
Gene symbol
 Question
Where is the most over-expressed gene located?
What is the name of the gene?
Where is the Pasilla gene located (FBgn0261552)?
 Solution
The annotated table contains no column names, which makes it difficult to read. We would like to add them before going further.

 Hands On: Add column names
Create a new tabular dataset (header) from the following (header line of the DESeq2 output)

GeneID	Base mean	log2(FC)	StdErr	Wald-Stats	P-value	P-adj	Chromosome	Start	End	Strand	Feature	Gene symbol
 Tip: Creating a new file

 Concatenate multiple datasets or collections to add this header line to the Annotate output:
param-file “Concatenate Dataset”: the header dataset
“Dataset”
Click on param-repeat “Insert Dataset”
param-file “select”: output of Annotate tool
Rename the output to Annotated DESeq2 results
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Extraction and annotation of differentially expressed genes
Now we would like to extract the most differentially expressed genes due to the treatment with a fold change > 2 (or < 1/2).

 Hands On: Extract the most differentially expressed genes
 Filter data on any column using simple expressions to extract genes with a significant change in gene expression (adjusted p-value below 0.05) between treated and untreated samples:
param-file “Filter”: Annotated DESeq2 results
“With following condition”: c7<0.05
“Number of header lines to skip”: 1
Rename the output Genes with significant adj p-value.

 Question
How many genes have a significant change in gene expression between these conditions?

 Solution
 Comment
The file with the independently filtered results can be used for further downstream analysis as it excludes genes with only a few read counts, as these genes will not be considered as significantly differentially expressed.

We will now select only the genes with a fold change (FC) > 2 or FC < 0.5. Note that the DESeq2 output file contains log_2FC
, rather than FC itself, so we filter for abs(log_2FC)>1
 (which implies FC > 2 or FC < 0.5).

 Filter data on any column using simple expressions to extract genes with an abs(log_2FC)>1
:
param-file “Filter”: Genes with significant adj p-value
“With following condition”: abs(c3)>1
“Number of header lines to skip”: 1
Rename the output Genes with significant adj p-value & abs(log2(FC)) > 1.

 Question
How many genes have been conserved?
Can the Pasilla gene (ps, FBgn0261552) be found in this table?
 Solution
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We now have a table with 113 lines and a header corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes. For each gene, we have its ID, its mean normalized counts (averaged over all samples from both conditions), its log_2FC
 and other information including gene symbol and position.

Visualization of the expression of the differentially expressed genes
We could plot the log_2FC
 for the extracted genes, but here we would like to look at a heatmap of expression for these genes in the different samples. So we need to extract the normalized counts for these genes.

We proceed in several steps:

Extract and plot the normalized counts for these genes for each sample with a heatmap, using the normalized count file generated by DESeq2
Compute, extract and plot the Z-score of the normalized counts
 Comment: Advanced tutorials on visualization
In this tutorial, we will quickly explain some possible visualization. For more details, please have a look in the extra tutorials on visualization of RNA-Seq results:

Visualization of RNA-Seq results with heatmap2
Visualization of RNA-Seq results with Volcano Plot
Visualization of the normalized counts
To extract the normalized counts for the interesting genes, we join the normalized count table generated by DESeq2 with the table we just generated. We will then keep only the columns corresponding to the normalized counts.

 Hands On: Extract the normalized counts of the most differentially expressed genes
 Join two Datasets side by side on a specified field with the following parameters:
param-file “Join”: the Normalized counts file (output of DESeq2 tool)
“using column”: Column: 1
param-file “with”: Genes with significant adj p-value & abs(log2(FC)) > 1
“and column”: Column: 1
“Keep lines of first input that do not join with second input”: No
“Keep the header lines”: Yes
The generated file has more columns than we need for the heatmap: mean normalized counts, log_2FC
 and other annotation information. We need to remove the extra columns.

 Cut columns from a table with the following parameters to extract the columns with the gene IDs and normalized counts:
“Cut columns”: c1-c8
“Delimited by”: Tab
param-file “From”: the joined dataset (output of Join two Datasets tool)
Rename the output to Normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We now have a table with 114 lines (the 113 most differentially expressed genes and a header) and the normalized counts for these genes across the 7 samples.

In the first column we have the gene identifiers. They are unique, but difficult to understand. If you want to work with the (more familiar) gene symbols, you can use “c21,c2-c8” for the column selection. However, be aware, gene symbols might not be unique.

 Hands On: Plot the heatmap of the normalized counts of these genes for the samples
 heatmap2 ( Galaxy version 3.2.0+galaxy1) to plot the heatmap:
param-file “Input should have column headers”: Normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes
“Data transformation”: Log2(value+1) transform my data
“Enable data clustering”: Yes
“Labeling columns and rows”: Label columns and not rows
“Type of colormap to use”: Gradient with 2 colors
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

You should obtain something similar to:

Heatmap with the normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 45: Normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes
 Question
What does the X-axis of the heatmap represent? What about the Y axis?
Do you observe anything in the clustering of the samples and the genes?
What changes if you regenerate the heatmap, this time selecting Plot the data as it is in “Data transformation”?
Why cannot we use Log2(value) transform my data in “Data transformation”?
How could you generate a heatmap of normalized counts for all up-regulated genes with fold change > 2?
 Solution
Visualization of the Z-score
To compare the gene expression over samples, we could also use the Z-score, which is often represented in publications.

The Z-score gives the number of standard-deviations that a value is away from the mean of all the values in the same group, here the same gene. A Z-score of -2 for the gene X in sample A means that this value is 2 standard-deviations lower than the mean of the values for gene X in all the samples (A, B, C, etc).

The Z-score z_i,j
 for a gene i
 in a sample j
 given the normalized count x_i,j
 is computed as z_i,j=x_i,j−x_i¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯s_i
 with x_i¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
 the mean and s_i
 the standard deviation of the normalized counts for the gene i
 over all samples.

 Details: Compute the Z-score for all genes
We would like now to plot a heatmap for the Z-scores:

Heatmap with the Z-score counts for the most differentially expressed genes. 
Open image in new tab


Figure 46: Z-scores for the most differentially expressed genes
 Hands On: Plot the Z-score of the most differentially expressed genes
 heatmap2 ( Galaxy version 3.2.0+galaxy1) to plot the heatmap:
param-file “Input should have column headers”: Normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes
“Data transformation”: Plot the data as it is
“Compute z-scores prior to clustering”: Compute on rows
“Enable data clustering”: Yes
“Labeling columns and rows”: Label columns and not rows
“Type of colormap to use”: Gradient with 3 colors
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Functional enrichment analysis of the DE genes
We have extracted genes that are differentially expressed in treated (PS gene-depleted) samples compared to untreated samples. Now, we would like to know if the differentially expressed genes are enriched transcripts of genes which belong to more common or specific categories in order to identify biological functions that might be impacted.

Gene Ontology analysis
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis is widely used to reduce complexity and highlight biological processes in genome-wide expression studies. However, standard methods give biased results on RNA-Seq data due to over-detection of differential expression for long and highly-expressed transcripts.

goseq (Young et al. 2010) provides methods for performing GO analysis of RNA-Seq data while taking length bias into account. goseq could also be applied to other category-based tests of RNA-Seq data, such as KEGG pathway analysis, as discussed in a further section.

goseq needs 2 files as inputs:

A tabular file with the differentially expressed genes from all genes assayed in the RNA-Seq experiment with 2 columns:
the Gene IDs (unique within the file), in uppercase letters
a boolean indicating whether the gene is differentially expressed or not (True if differentially expressed or False if not)
A file with information about the length of a gene to correct for potential length bias in differentially expressed genes
 Hands On: Prepare the first dataset for goseq
 Compute ( Galaxy version 2.1) on rows with the following parameters:
param-file “Input file”: the DESeq2 result file (output of DESeq2 tool)
In “Expressions”:
param-text “Add expression”: bool(float(c7)<0.05)
param-select “Mode of the operation?”: Append
Under “Error handling”:
param-toggle “Autodetect column types”: No
param-select “If an expression cannot be computed for a row”: Fill in a replacement value
param-select “Replacement value”: False
 Cut columns from a table with the following parameters:
“Cut columns”: c1,c8
“Delimited by”: Tab
param-file “From”: the output of the Compute tool
 Change Case with
param-file “From”: the output of the previous Cut tool
“Change case of columns”: c1
“Delimited by”: Tab
“To”: Upper case
Rename the output to Gene IDs and differential expression
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We just generated the first input for goseq. As second input for goseq we need the gene lengths. We can use here the gene lengths generated by featureCounts or Gene length and GC content and format the gene IDs.

 Hands On: Prepare the gene length file
Copy the feature length collection previously generated by featureCounts tool into this history

 Tip: Copy a dataset between histories

 Extract Dataset with:

param-collection “Input List”: featureCounts on collection N: Feature lengths
“How should a dataset be selected?”: The first dataset
 Change Case with the following parameters:

param-file “From”: GSM461177_untreat_paired (output of Extract Dataset tool)
“Change case of columns”: c1
“Delimited by”: Tab
“To”: Upper case
Rename the output to Gene IDs and length

Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

We have now the two required input files for goseq.

 Hands On: Perform GO analysis
 goseq ( Galaxy version 1.50.0+galaxy0) with
“Differentially expressed genes file”: Gene IDs and differential expression
“Gene lengths file”: Gene IDs and length
“Gene categories”: Get categories
“Select a genome to use”: Fruit fly (dm6)
“Select Gene ID format”: Ensembl Gene ID
“Select one or more categories”: GO: Cellular Component, GO: Biological Process, GO: Molecular Function
In “Output Options”
“Output Top GO terms plot?”: Yes
“Extract the DE genes for the categories (GO/KEGG terms)?”: Yes
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

goseq generates with these parameters 3 outputs:

A table (Ranked category list - Wallenius method) with the following columns for each GO term:

category: GO category
over_rep_pval: p-value for over-representation of the term in the differentially expressed genes
under_rep_pval: p-value for under-representation of the term in the differentially expressed genes
numDEInCat: number of differentially expressed genes in this category
numInCat: number of genes in this category
term: detail of the term
ontology: MF (Molecular Function - molecular activities of gene products), CC (Cellular Component - where gene products are active), BP (Biological Process - pathways and larger processes made up of the activities of multiple gene products)
p.adjust.over_represented: p-value for over-representation of the term in the differentially expressed genes, adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure
p.adjust.under_represented: p-value for under-representation of the term in the differentially expressed genes, adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure
To identify categories significantly enriched/unenriched below some p-value cutoff, it is necessary to use the adjusted p-value.

 Question
How many GO terms are over-represented with an adjusted P-value < 0.05? How many are under-represented?
How are the over-represented GO terms divided into MF, CC and BP? And for under-represented GO terms?
 Solution
A graph with the top 10 over-represented GO terms

 Question
Top over-represented GO terms. 

What is the x-axis? How is it computed?

 Solution
A table with the differentially expressed genes (from the list we provided) associated to the GO terms (DE genes for categories (GO/KEGG terms))

 Comment: Advanced tutorial on enrichment analysis
In this tutorial, we covered GO enrichment analysis with goseq. To learn other methods and tools for gene set enrichment analysis, please have a look at the “RNA-Seq genes to pathways” tutorial.

KEGG pathways analysis
goseq can also be used to identify interesting KEGG pathways. The KEGG pathway database is a collection of pathway maps representing current knowledge of molecular interaction, reaction and relation networks. A map can integrate many entities including genes, proteins, RNAs, chemical compounds, glycans, and chemical reactions, as well as disease genes and drug targets.

For example, the pathway dme00010 represents the glycolysis process (conversion of glucose into pyruvate with generation of small amounts of ATP and NADH) for Drosophila melanogaster:

dme00010 KEGG pathway. 

 Hands On: Perform KEGG pathway analysis
 goseq ( Galaxy version 1.50.0+galaxy0) with
“Differentially expressed genes file”: Gene IDs and differential expression
“Gene lengths file”: Gene IDs and length
“Gene categories”: Get categories
“Select a genome to use”: Fruit fly (dm6)
“Select Gene ID format”: Ensembl Gene ID
“Select one or more categories”: KEGG
In “Output Options”
“Output Top GO terms plot?”: No
“Extract the DE genes for the categories (GO/KEGG terms)?”: Yes
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

goseq generates with these parameters 2 outputs:

A large table with the KEGG terms and some statistics

 Question
How many KEGG pathways terms have been identified?
How many KEGG pathways terms are over-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
What are the over-represented KEGG pathways terms?
How many KEGG pathways terms are under-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
 Solution
A table with the differentially expressed genes (from the list we provided) associated with the KEGG pathways (DE genes for categories (GO/KEGG terms))

We could investigate which genes are involved in which pathways by looking at the second file generated by goseq. However, this can be cumbersome and we would like to see the pathways as represented in the previous image. Pathview (Luo and Brouwer 2013) can help to automatically generate similar images to the previous one, while also adding extra information about the genes (e.g. expression) in our study.

This tool needs 2 main inputs:

Pathway ID(s) to plot, either as just one ID or as a file with one column with the pathway IDs
A tabular file with the genes in the RNA-Seq experiment with 2 (or more) columns:
the gene IDs (unique within the file)
some information about the genes

This can be for example a p-value or a fold change. This information will be added to the pathway plot: the node of the corresponding gene will be colored given the value. If there are different columns, the different information will be plotted side by side on the node.

Here we would like to visualize the 2 KEGG pathways: the over-represented 00010 (Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis) and the most under-represented (yet not significantly) 03040 (Spliceosome). We would like the gene nodes to be colored by Log2 Fold Change for the differentially expressed genes because of the treatment.

 Hands On: Overlay log2FC on KEGG pathway
 Cut columns from a table with the following parameters:
“Cut columns”: c1,c3
“Delimited by”: Tab
param-file “From”: Genes with significant adj p-value
Rename to Genes with significant adj p-value and their Log2 FC

We extracted the ID and Log2 Fold Change for the genes that have a significant adjusted p-value.

Create a new tabular file from the following (IDs of the pathways to plot) named KEGG pathways to plot

00010
03040
 Pathview ( Galaxy version 1.34.0+galaxy0) with
“Number of pathways to plot”: Multiple
param-file “KEGG pathways”: KEGG pathways to plot
“Does the file have header (a first line with column names)?”: No
“Species to use”: Fly
“Provide a gene data file?”: Yes
param-file “Gene data”: Genes with significant adj p-value and their Log2 FC
“Does the file have header (a first line with column names)?”: Yes
“Format for gene data”: Ensembl Gene ID
“Provide a compound data file?”: No
In “Output Options”
“Output for pathway”: KEGG native
“Plot on same layer?”: Yes
Link to here |  FAQs | Gitter Chat | Help Forum

Pathview generates a collection with the KEGG visualization: one file per pathway.

 Question
dme00010 KEGG pathway from Pathview

KEGG pathway. 

What are the colored boxes?
What is the color code?
 Solution
Conclusion
In this tutorial, we have analyzed real RNA sequencing data to extract useful information, such as which genes are up or downregulated by depletion of the Pasilla gene, but also which GO terms or KEGG pathways they are involved in. To answer these questions, we analyzed RNA sequence datasets using a reference-based RNA-Seq data analysis approach. This approach can be summarized with the following scheme:


